The Project Gutenberg eBook, On the Architectural History of Chester
Cathedral, by Thomas Rickman, Edited by Rev. Canon Blomfield


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: On the Architectural History of Chester Cathedral


Author: Thomas Rickman

Editor: Rev. Canon Blomfield

Release Date: April 25, 2020  [eBook #61924]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE ARCHITECTURAL HISTORY OF
CHESTER CATHEDRAL***


Transcribed from the 1864 Courant Office edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                   [Picture: Public domain book cover]





                           ON THE ARCHITECTURAL
                      History of Chester Cathedral.


                            BY THOMAS RICKMAN,

                       WITH AN INTRODUCTORY MEMOIR.

                                * * * * *

                           A PAPER READ BEFORE

          The Architectural, Archæological, and Historic Society
                               of Chester.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                       BY THE REV. CANON BLOMFIELD.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                 CHESTER:
             PRINTED AT THE COURANT OFFICE, NORTHGATE STREET.

                                  1864.

            [Picture: South Aisle of Choir: Chester Cathedral]




ON THE
Architectural History of Chester Cathedral,


                            BY THOMAS RICKMAN,
                                 WITH AN
             INTRODUCTORY MEMOIR BY THE REV. CANON BLOMFIELD.

THE MS. of the following Report by Thomas Rickman, on the Architectural
features of Chester Cathedral, has been for many years in the possession
of a gentleman in Chester, {3a} but has never yet appeared in print.  It
is supposed to have been drawn up at the request of Dean Cholmondeley,
who was one of Rickman’s early patrons, and the date of it may be fixed
at about 1812.  It is therefore probably the earliest specimen of his
style of architectural analysis.  As, at the same time, it affords a
valuable specimen of the accuracy of his observation, and the clearness
of his discriminative judgment, it is thought right to present it to the
public, through the medium of the Chester Architectural and Archæological
Society.

The name of Thomas Rickman is familiar to every student of Gothic
Architecture, as the author of the clearest and most comprehensive text
book on the subject.  He was the first to elucidate the true
characteristics of Gothic Architecture, and reduce them to a simple and
intelligible system.  The nomenclature which is now universally received,
was first brought into use by him.  For though he adopted the title of
“Early English” from Miller, who had suggested it in 1805, {3b} and that
of “Decorated” from Britton, who applied it in his description of
Malmesbury Abbey, in 1807; {3c} yet he was the first person who really
gave substance and meaning to those terms by assigning to each its proper
characteristics.  The term “Perpendicular” he himself invented, as
describing the features of the later style.  Thus, arranging the whole
series of Ecclesiastical buildings in this country under the four
divisions of Norman, Early English, Decorated, and Perpendicular, and
accurately defining the special and distinctive features of each, he
became in fact the founder of the modern science of Gothic Architecture,
the author of the Grammar by which the study of it is still regulated and
pursued.

Rickman therefore deserves a higher place in the temple of Fame than he
appears at present to occupy.  The habit of laborious and patient
investigation, the sound and discriminating judgment, the faculty of nice
and accurate comparison, which enabled him, wholly unaided by the science
or labour of others, to work out for himself that simple yet clear and
comprehensive system, which secured this branch of architectural science
from the ignorance and bad taste of preceding centuries, and established
it on a fixed and certain basis, ought to place him in the foremost rank
of men who have contributed to the advancement of useful knowledge.

As the history of his life and labours is but little known, it may be an
acceptable introduction to the reading of this Report on Chester
Cathedral, if we preface it with a short biographical Memoir.

                                * * * * *

THOMAS RICKMAN was born at Maidenhead on the 8th of June, 1776, and was
the eldest son of Thomas and Sarah Packman, members of the Society of
Friends.  His father’s profession seems to have combined that of grocer,
and chemist, and druggist, in which latter capacity he gave medical
advice to his customers.  Eventually he relinquished all but the medical
department, and practiced as an apothecary, in which profession he wished
to bring up his eldest son.  Circumstances, and his son’s natural
tendencies, determined otherwise.  It appears that even the strict and
unæsthetic notions of his father’s sect could not restrain the
development of the son’s taste for order and beauty of arrangement, which
manifested itself, in the first instance, in a passion for military
display.  As a boy, he was eager to attend every review and parade which
he could possibly reach, and to make himself master of all the details of
military evolutions.  He employed his leisure moments at home in drawing
figures of soldiers, cutting them out of pasteboard, and arranging them
on tables in an upper room which he had appropriated to himself.  He made
several thousands of these pasteboard soldiers, both cavalry and
infantry, and disposed them in order of battle, to illustrate some prints
which he had procured of celebrated battles.  He studied the history of
the modern campaigns, and knew the services of all the officers in the
Army List.  He could tell the details of the uniform of every regiment,
not only of his own country, but of most of the continental nations, and
understood the strength and value of the various instruments of warfare
better than most of those who used them. {5}

It does not appear that this early tendency to military tactics ever led
Rickman to take an active part in them, though it may have served to
unsettle his views for some time with regard to the choice of a
profession.  His father removed to Lewes in Sussex, in 1797, and Thomas
then went to London, first as assistant to Mr. Stringer, a chemist in the
Strand, and afterwards to Mr. Atkinson, an apothecary in Jermyn street.
But disliking the profession, or the town, he removed to Saffron Walden,
and entered into the service of Messrs. Day and Greer, grocers, in that
town.  From thence he again went to London, and prepared himself, by
walking the hospitals, to act as his father’s assistant at Lewes, whither
he went in 1801.  But he was still unsettled, and again repaired to
London in 1803, to enter into partnership with a cornfactor.  While there
he married his cousin, Lucy Rickman.

On the death of Mrs. Rickman, in 1808, he removed to Liverpool, and
entered the office of an insurance broker.  Here it was that his taste
for æsthetic forms and methodical arrangements again overcame his
sectarian prejudices, and directed his attention to the study of
architecture, and especially Church Architecture.  The business of his
office, which commenced at ten and closed at four, gave him much leisure:
this he employed in making excursions on foot into the country round
Liverpool, and examining the details of all the churches which he could
reach.  He would start very early in the morning, and accomplish a good
deal before his office opened; and on Saturday afternoons he would set
off on a longer journey to more distant places, and spend the whole of
Sunday, which had no special claims on his Quaker conscience, in pursuing
his favourite researches.  This course he pursued with untiring industry
for several years, until he had made himself master of all the
characteristics of Church Architecture which could be found in that part
of the kingdom.  He afterwards extended his journies to other counties,
and examined and took notes of the special features of almost all the
churches in the kingdom; making accurate measurements and drawings of all
that he thought worthy of notice.  In this laborious investigation he
spent not only many years, but many thousand pounds; and he thereby
accumulated a vast fund of architectural data, on which he founded the
system of classification of styles which is now universally accepted.

His maiden sister followed him to Liverpool, and opened business as a
confectioner; and those who were conversant with that town some forty
years ago may remember her very odd looking shop front, the design for
which “is said to have been taken by Rickman from the Choragic monument
of Thrasyllus, in Greece.”

While in Liverpool, he married his second wife Christiana Horner, sister
of Thomas Horner, who passed so much of his time on the top of St. Paul’s
Cathedral, painting the Panorama of London, which was exhibited at the
Colosseum in the Regent’s Park.  The first result of Rickman’s
architectural investigation appeared in the shape of an Essay in the
Liverpool “Panorama of Science and Art,” bearing the same title under
which he afterwards published it in an enlarged form, “An attempt to
discriminate the styles of architecture in England.” {6a}  This Essay, on
its first appearance in 1817, attracted general attention and brought its
author under the notice of many influential persons both in Liverpool and
Chester, for whom he furnished designs for monuments and other buildings.
The Church of St. Mary, at Birkenhead, was erected from his designs, and
is one of the earliest efforts of his skill.  The transepts now attached
to this Church formed no part of Rickman’s design, but are the work of a
later architect.

At this time the Parliamentary Grant for the building of new Churches
called forth a host of aspiring Gothic architects; amongst them Thomas
Rickman appeared, and gained the first prize for a design, which was
afterwards executed for St. George’s Church at Birmingham. {6b}  Hitherto
he had not been a _professional_ architect; and having no practical
experience in the constructive department of the art, he was unable to
undertake the exercise of it until he had associated with himself Mr.
Henry Hutchinson, a gentleman who supplied this defect. {7}  He then
entered upon a large field of work, and was the popular Gothic architect
of the day.  Amongst the many Churches which he designed and erected in
different parts of the kingdom may be mentioned Oulton, near Leeds,
Hampton Lacy, in Warwickshire, St. David’s, Glasgow, and St. Jude’s,
Liverpool.  He also erected the Chapel and Asylum for the Blind at
Bristol; and, in 1827, the new building of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
Rose Castle, the palace of the Bishop of Carlisle, was also restored by
him.

In 1830, Mr. Hutchinson died; and four years after, Rickman took into
partnership Mr. R. C. Hussey, a gentleman who is now employing his
talents on the restoration of St. John’s Church, Chester.  In 1835, he
married his third wife, Miss Millar, of Edinburgh, by whom he had a son,
and who survived him.  At this time he had relinquished his connection
with the Quakers, and attached himself to the sect of the Irvingites, to
which he continued to belong until his death, which took place in 1811.

The characteristics of Thomas Rickman’s mind were great intelligence and
quickness of perception; considerable powers of method and arrangement;
and indefatigable industry in investigation.  He was physically strong
and active, and capable of enduring great bodily fatigue.  He cannot
however, be said to have possessed much imagination, or inventive genius.
His work on Architecture is one that displays rather acuteness of
observation, and energy of mind, than power of conception; and the
character of the buildings which he executed indicates the same accuracy
of imitation from authentic examples, and the same want of originality
and fertility of invention.  “But after all abatement is made, it must be
granted that to Rickman, more than to any other man, is due the great
advance which within the last few years has been made in the knowledge
and appreciation of Gothic Architecture in this country.” {8a}



AN ARCHÆOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF CHESTER,
BY THOMAS RICKMAN. {8b}


The Metropolitan Cathedrals of Canterbury and York, and the Episcopal
edifices of most of the English sees, have not only been described as
beautiful and valuable remains, but many of them have become not
undeservedly celebrated over almost every part of the British Empire.
Amongst these, however, the Cathedral of Chester has not only been almost
entirely overlooked, but, by a late writer in a very popular work,
described as “a heavy, uninteresting pile, not worth examining.”

Having examined it with some attention, and finding therein a more
complete succession of styles than I recollect to have met with in almost
any other building, I wish by a few remarks to excite some attention to
its beauties.  I therefore beg leave to offer a slight sketch of what
appears from its present state to have been the order of its
construction.

From the situation of those remains of the Norman fabric which are still
visible, I have little doubt the present church stands pretty nearly on
the same foundation as the Norman did; for these remains consist of the
_north_ wall of the _Nave_ forming the _south_ wall of the _Cloisters_,
and of the _east_ Wall of the _North Transept_.

From the situation of this latter wall it seems pretty clear that the
Norman Central Tower was of the same size as the present one, and most
likely was not taken down till that was built.  The North Wall of the
Nave contains two doors.  The easternmost one deserves particular
attention, as it is a good specimen of the mouldings and ornaments of the
early Norman.  The arches remaining in the east wall of the North
Transept are evidently those of a Triforium, or gallery over the lower
arches, and it seems probable that a future examination may discover some
part of those lower arches still remaining.

The oldest portion of the building is the west wall of the Cloisters, and
that portion of the north wall which reaches to the door leading to the
Grammar School.  These appear to have been erected in the latter part of
the Norman style, when considerable advances had been made towards the
lighter mouldings of the succeeding styles.

The blank door in the north west corner of the Cloister is singular, from
the sort of ornamental feathering attached to a round arch; but as the
same kind of ornament is used to the openings of the east wall, leading
down to the lately opened lower apartments, it is possible that this
ornament may have been added at a subsequent period to an ancient round
headed door.  These lower apartments above spoken of, the Chapter House,
and a part now used as a Vestry, the door of which goes out of the north
aisle of the Choir, are all of a simple yet beautiful description of the
Early English.

The Chapter House is peculiarly valuable, as it remains in its original
state, and appears never to have been altered.  Its Vestibule is a
composition of singular beauty from the simplicity of its formation, and
is, with the arches in front to the Cloister (now filled with some
wretchedly ill drawn sashes), {9a} of the same style.

The north wall of the Choir (on account of the garden inaccessible on the
exterior side) I have not been able to examine, but from some singular
appearances visible from the City Walls, I have some reason to suppose
that it is nearly of the same date with the Vestry spoken of above, and
that the _present windows_ in the wall were introduced at a subsequent
period.

Next in order of date appear to be some of the walls, buttresses, and
interior arches, and perhaps some part of the Lady Chapel; but they have
been so altered by and intermixed with the reparation of the Chapel in
the Perpendicular style, that it requires close inspection to find them
out.  But so singularly have these reparations been added, that I some
places, a part of the Early English arch, with its peculiar toothed
ornament, is framed into and forms a part of the arches of those
reparations.

Towards the conclusion of the Early English style, the piers, and arches,
and gallery of the Choir {9b} appear to have been erected; and though the
shafts of the piers appear to be nearly similar, there is a curious
difference in the mouldings of the arches on the north and south sides of
the Choir.  At the period when the Early English style had in its parts
advanced to nearly the beauty of the next style, two small arches with
tracery in front, close to the screen to the Lady Chapel, were placed in
the aisle of the Choir.  These are of beautiful workmanship, and nearly
resemble arches in the galleries of Westminster Abbey.

There are also two arches in the south wall of the Choir, flattish, and
of considerably broader dimensions, and having feathering, whose
mouldings are very like those of these two arches.  From this
circumstance I am led to conclude that this wall also, at least as high
as the bottom of the windows, is of the same date,—say perhaps, 1280 to
1300.

From appearances, as they now remain, more particularly as there is no
trace at present of what was the Norman South Transept, I apprehend the
situation of the Church about the year 1300, (Edward I. died 1307) to
have been this:—The Nave, North Transept, and great Tower remaining in
their original state; the walls of the North Aisle of the Choir, and the
whole of the Lady Chapel, together with those of the Choir as high as the
top of the Gallery or Triforium, completed so that service could be
performed in the Lady Chapel, and perhaps, with a temporary roof, in the
Choir itself.

After the Decorated style {10a} was in some considerable degree
established, the building appears to have proceeded, and the walls in the
Choir raised; the Clerestory windows bearing evident marks, amidst the
present barbarous tracery, of their having been originally of the early
Decorated character, and of good execution. {10b}

The upper part of the Eastern Window still retains what seems to be a
portion of its original tracery.  At this time also appears to have been
inserted the _windows_ of the _North_ and _South Aisles_ of the _Choir_;
and here again the work appears to have stood still, for the next
succeeding works are considerably advanced in their execution.

The next alteration we have to notice is a very considerable one and
appears to have commenced in the reign of Edward III, and perhaps about
the middle of it.  It is very extensive, including the whole of the wall
of the East Aisle of the South Transept, with the tracery of its windows,
the whole of the piers of the South Transept, and of the Nave, with the
arches resting on them, except the four great piers of the centre Tower.
The walls, buttresses, and battlements of both Aisles of the South
Transept, and the South Aisle of the Nave, if not completed, were so far
finished, that the succeeding architect appears (from some obscure
remains of pinnacles, &c., still in existence) not to have deviated from
the original design.

At this period a stoppage seems to have taken place, probably during the
reign of Richard II., for all the subsequent work is Perpendicular; {11a}
and the new architect seems to have found the tracery of the windows of
the West Aisle of the South Transept, and the South Aisle of the Nave not
prepared, although the architrave mouldings (which are shafts with
beautiful Decorated capitals) were carried up to the springing of the
arch, and the arch mouldings completed, except the mullion itself, the
courses of which are different from those of the arch mouldings.

It also appears probable that no design had been made for the great South
Window, as the wall was carried up very little above its commencement.

The workmanship of the Decorated architect is peculiarly excellent.  The
tracery of those windows which he completed is uncommonly rich in design,
and delicate in execution, notwithstanding the poor texture of the stone,
which has rendered it impossible to make out the mouldings of some of the
tablets.  Enough remains, in parts a little defended from the weather, to
show the excellence of the exterior workmanship; and the capitals of the
interior piers are of design, which, if they were cleared of their
numerous coats of whitewash, would be equal to many in York Minster.

The succeeding architect appears not only to have carried up to the roof
the walls of the South Transept and the Nave, but to have pulled down a
part, if not all, of the Norman tower.  From the great size of the piers,
however, and other circumstances, I think it probable that he did not
take the piers down to the foundation, but merely to the springing of the
arches, and then, taking away the shafts, cased the old piers with his
new work; and this will account for the Norman remains which are left
standing in the North Transept. {11b}  Another circumstance which leads
me to suppose that the piers were not taken down to the floor is the
continuance of the stone screen, which is evidently of Decorated
workmanship.

And here, perhaps, will be the proper place to mention another and most
beautiful relic of that style.  This is what is known as the Shrine of
St. Werburgh, which,—shorn of its battlements, and having the shafts of
the upper arches taken away,—is become the Throne of the Bishop; and
though sadly disfigured by many coats of paint is worthy of great
attention.  Indeed it is one of the purest and richest small specimens I
know, exclusive of the extensive works already noticed.

This Perpendicular architect raised the _large windows_ of the North and
South Transept, {12} which, though different, are both beautiful of their
kind.  From various small marks of similarity, I am induced to suppose
that at the time those works were carrying on, the present _Cloisters_
were all proceeded with.  The general design of these is good, but the
execution is not quite equal to what appears of the exterior remains of
the Church itself; of the latter, though now divested of battlements and
pinnacles, and the tower so weather worn, that its design is with
difficulty traced, the ornaments of the cornice of the Nave and such of
the mouldings as are yet distinguishable show the work to have been very
well executed.  Of the Cloisters, the whole internal walls, containing
the windows and groinings of the roof, appear to have been executed
within a short time of each other, though perhaps not quite altogether
so.  The small arches on the west side most likely contained the
lavatories of the Monks, and as the exterior wall of the Cloister is on
every side much older than the interior, the different breadths and the
various arches still remaining in that outer wall, together with the
small arches already mentioned, cause a very great and valuable variety
of springings, and modifications of groining, of a much earlier date than
perhaps later Early English.

At some period, perhaps not very late in the reign of Henry VII. an
architect, apparently a different one from those engaged in the other
part of the work, seems to have employed his ingenuity in metamorphosing
the Lady Chapel, with as little new work as possible, from the enriched
Early English to the Perpendicular style of his own times.  With what
judgment he has done this in the interior {13a} requires more attention
to determine, than I have yet had an opportunity of bestowing.

     [Picture: The Cloisters, Chester.  North side—the Lavatory &c.]

Of this part of the Building externally, whether from his enlargement of
the windows, without sufficient strength in the walls to allow it, or
from the weight of its groined roof, or from some other cause, the
windows and arches are failing very fast, and the mullions sadly
distorted.

The next and final augmentation we have to notice appears to have been
begun in the latter part of the reign of Henry VII, though most likely
not finished till after the accession of his successor.  This
augmentation is the West Front, the Consistory Court, and the South
Porch.  It is possible the Perpendicular Architect before spoken of might
lay the foundation, and carry up part of the walls, of this part of the
Building, which is clearly distinguished as an augmentation, by the level
on which it is built.  But the finishing is very different from what
remains visible of his work, which, though rich, is simple; while the
whole of this part has evident marks of that frittered multiplication of
ornament so visible in Henry VII’s Chapel.  Yet though this work,
particularly in the upper part of the Porch, begins to be thus frittered,
there is certainly much beauty in the design, and peculiar delicacy in
the execution.

The West Entrance, the adjoining niche work, the window above, and the
door itself, all deserve minute and attentive examination; for though,
from the nature of the stone, much of the original beauty is gone, there
are yet parts in which the carvings preserve nearly as much sharpness as
when first executed.

With this work the Edifice seems to have been completed, and we will now
endeavour to look at it as it then appeared, at which time I believe the
view of the South side was free, as those disgraceful erections which now
form the narrow passage at the corner of the South Transept were not then
in existence. {13b}  The Building therefore could be viewed in its whole
length, by an observer placed opposite the centre of the South Transept.

At this period I conceive the South View, or, as it may be called, the
Show side of the Cathedral, was perhaps but little inferior in real
beauty to any one in England,—Canterbury, York, and Salisbury excepted.
To prove this, let us examine its parts.  The West End newly finished,
and the Tower, and the other works of his predecessor and the
architecture of the upper part of the Choir, new enough to harmonize
therewith, this front view must have presented a very beautiful
appearance.  Though the battlements are now all gone, enough remains to
lead us to suppose that the whole line was finished with rich pinnacles,
and battlements. {14a}  The buttresses were very fine, and the grouping
of those at the corner of the South Transept peculiarly good.

All the Windows appear to have had fine canopies, and what original
tracery remains is of great beauty of design, and delicacy of execution;
and though now none exists, we may reasonably suppose the Windows filled
with painted glass.  The picture appeared complete; but it was not long
to last, as the funds for its support were soon afterwards absorbed; and
tradition avers that during the Usurpation of Cromwell, it was even
degraded so far as to become a stable!

At the Restoration, it was probably in bad condition.  The exterior of
the Choir appears to have been worse than the rest, for that has been
cased; while from the workmanship of that casing, and the present
mullions of the Windows, I apprehend these reparations were made since
the Restoration.  This casing is the last considerable reparation of the
walls, but as the roofs have been kept in repair, and the present worthy
Dean {14b} is laudably assiduous in giving every reparation the funds of
the building will admit, we may hope that no further dilapidations will
ensue, and perhaps, after a time, that some restoration may take place.
More minute attention than I have hitherto been able to bestow on some
particular parts, may enable me hereafter to make some addition to and
perhaps corrections of the present rapid sketch of this very interesting
Edifice.

I know not how far these observations may coincide with Historical
Records; but it is proper to state that they are made up solely from my
own examination of the present state of the Building.




Footnotes.


{3a}  Mr. Thomas Hodkinson, Architect.

{3b}  In his _Description of the Cathedral Church of Ely_.

{3c}  _Architectural Antiquities_, Vol. I. p. 3.

{5}  In allusion to these military predilections, his professional friend
and associate, Mr. R. C. Hussey, thus writes, “These really remained with
him to the end of his life.  He would always converse readily and with
animation on military subjects; and his wife observed that if he saw a
soldier approaching, he would cross the street in order to get as near to
him as he could.”  An old friend of Rickman’s told me that he once met at
dinner, at Dublin, an officer (I think a major in the army) who said an
extraordinary thing had occurred to him, for he once came across a Quaker
who knew more about his (the major’s) regiment than he did himself.  It
need scarcely be added that the Quaker was no other than Mr. Rickman, our
architect.

{6a}  I may here relate an anecdote of my own personal meeting with
Rickman.  I was once travelling in a stage coach, and had drawn the
conversation gradually into an architectural channel.  One of my
companions, an elderly gentleman in Quaker costume, after some general
remarks, addressed me as follows:—“Young friend, thou seemest to have
some taste for architecture,—where did’st thou pick it up?”  My reply
was, that the little I knew of the subject had been gleaned from the
perusal of Mr. Rickman’s clever work on Gothic Architecture.  “Indeed,
friend,” continued my querist, “is that verily so?  Then, I am Thomas
Rickman.”

{6b}  This Church (writes Mr. Hussey) was erected under the Church
Building Commissioners, very soon after they were appointed; and it was
under their auspices, indeed, that he commenced his Church building.  He
used to say that when he had an interview with these functionaries, he
enquired how large a projection he might give to the Chancel.  The reply
was, that two feet was enough for a Chancel; and two feet is given to it
in this Church.  He is buried in the graveyard of St. George’s Church,
where a monument, erected by subscription, exists to his memory.  At this
time of day masons were so little accustomed to work Gothic windows, that
no one would give an estimate for work of this kind, consequently no
contract for a Gothic Church could be made.  As this would not suit
Rickman or the Church Commissioners, he had a set of patterns made for
cast iron Windows, and these he used for all the windows in St. George’s
Church, except the east window, which is of stone.  St. George’s is in
the Decorated style.

{7}  The architect here named was the father of the Rev. T. N.
Hutchinson, formerly Vice-Principal of the Chester Training College, and
now second Master of King Edward’s School, Birmingham.  The members of
the Chester Archæological Society need not to be reminded how thoroughly
the architectural tastes of the father are inherited by the son.

{8a}  Article on Rickman in Knight’s _Cyclopoædia of Biography_.

{8b}  It will be observed that, in the following paper, Rickman has
distinctly pointed out what he supposes to be the dates of erection of
the several portions of the Cathedral building.  Having no historical
authorities to refer to, he had fixed these entirely from his own notions
of the _probable_ periods, drawn from his examination of the distinctive
characteristics of the several parts.  We have it in our power now to
verify these dates from authentic records, and to show, as we have done
in foot notes, the singular accuracy of Rickman’s judgment in fixing
them.

{9a}  This fault has since Rickman’s time been remedied by the
substitution of two handsome and appropriate windows.

{9b}  The _Presentation Book of the Abbey_ says, “The Choir, Steeple and
Body of the Church were rebuilt about the time of King John, i.e. 1199 to
1216, Hugh Grylle, Abbot.”  The Early English period dates from the
accession of John in 1199, to 1272, in which year Henry III died.  The
work continued languidly through the abbacies of Marmion, Pincebeck,
Frind, and Capenhurst, to Simon de Albo Monasterio, who became Abbot in
1265, died in 1289, and was buried in the Chapter House.  During this
energetic abbacy, says Dr. Ormerod, “the monastery or a considerable
portion thereof was rebuilt.”

{10a}  The Decorated period extended from A.D. 1272 to 1377, or during
the reign of the three Edwards.

{10b}  Simon de Albo Monasterio was Abbot from 1265–1289, while his
important part of the work was in rapid progress.

{11a}  The Perpendicular style ranged from the accession of Richard II.
in 1377, to the death of Henry VIII. in 1546.

{11b}  Simon Ripley, who was Abbot of St. Werburgh’s, 1472 to 1479, is
stated to have rebuilt the _Nave_, _Tower_, and _South Transept_; but in
Webb’s portion of the _Vale Royal_ it is distinctly recorded that, in
1506, in the abbacy of John Birchenshaw “The old steeple of St. Werburgh
was taken down,” while two years afterwards the same record states that
“the foundation and the first stone of the Abbey laid, the Maior being
then present.”  This record has been hitherto connected with the western
tower, but Rickman’s argument seems to be conclusive, unless indeed,
which is quite probable, both were in progress at the same period.

{12}  _Not_ the windows which are to be found there now, which were
erected at the time of the general repair of the fabric, about 1816,
after Rickman’s survey.

{13a}  The Dean and Chapter have for some years past been gradually
restoring this beautiful structure to its original character; and the
Perpendicular work here half-complained of by Rickman has now almost
disappeared.

{13b}  The erections here so deservedly condemned were the remains of an
old cloth hall, originally built for the stranger merchants frequenting
the great annual fairs at Chester.  These buildings occupied great part
of the space now enclosed with railing on the S.W. side of the nave and
St. Oswald’s Church, and were pulled down about 20 years ago.

{14a}  In the print of Chester Cathedral given in Willis’ _Survey of
Cathedrals_, A.D. 1727, the battlements and rich crocketted pinnacles are
shown as existing then.  The South end of the South Transept is also
shewn to have been richly decorated with niches.

{14b}  Probably H. Cholmondeley, who was Dean of Chester, from 1806 to
1815.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE ARCHITECTURAL HISTORY OF
CHESTER CATHEDRAL***


******* This file should be named 61924-0.txt or 61924-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/1/9/2/61924


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

